# Car Model Optimization
This Python project was built using the [DEAP](https://github.com/deap/deap) evolutionary computation framework. This is an application of an evolutionary multi-objective algorithm to find the best cars in a set with respect to various factors. This repository contains two Python files, "mpg_vs_acceleration.py" and "all_except_origin.py". As implied by their names, the former finds cars that maximize both MPG and acceleration while the latter finds cars that maximize all attributes in the data set except country of origin. More information about the data set can be found below.

### The Dataset
This project makes use of the [Auto MPG Data Set](https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/auto+mpg) provided by the [UCI Machine Learning Repository](http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml). This data set was used in the 1983 American Statistical Association Exposition. The dataset included in this repository is a slightly modified version of the one provided by the Machine Learning Repository. The original dataset included six entries with missing values for horsepower. The dataset in this repository excludes these six entries. Thus, there are 392 entries with 9 different attributes (MPG, number of cylinders, engine displacement, horsepower, weight, acceleration, model year, origin, and car name) in the modified dataset.

### Files
In the "mpg_vs_acceleration.py" file file, we aim to maximize both MPG and acceleration. In the  "all_except_origin.py" file, we aim to maximize every attribute in the dataset except country of origin (since this would be difficult to quantify). 

### The Process
The process of finding the Pareto optimal cars is essentially the same for both files. We use the `eaMuPlusLambda` algorithm provided by the DEAP framework. To use this algorithm, we need to define the following: the fitness of an individual, the process for crossing two individuals, the process of mutating an individual, and the process of selecting which elements move on to the next generation.
1. Calculating Fitness
    - The process of calculating the fitness of an individual is quite simple. 
    - The fitness is simply a tuple containing the relevant attributes of the individual.
2. Crossing Individuals
    - The crossover process is slightly more involved.
    - We will begin by calculating the averages of the parents' attributes.
    - We will loop through every entry in the dataset and find the two that have attributes that most closely match the parents' average attributes.
        - We can determine how closely an entry matches the parents' averages by calculating the sum of the squared differences of each attribute.
        - The sum of squared differences is simply $$\sum_{i=0}^{n}{(a_n - \bar{a}_n)^2}$$ where $$a$$ is the entry's attribute, $$\bar{a}$$ is the parents' average attribute, and $$n$$ is the number of attributes being optimized.
    - Finally, we will replace the parents' attributes with the two closest entries' attributes.
3. Mutating Individuals
    - The mutation process is simple.
    - Given a predefined probability, the current individual's data is replaced by the data of a random entry in the dataset.
4. Selecting Individuals
    - Thankfully, the selection process is already implemented by DEAP.
    - In this project, we use the [NSGA-II algorithm](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/996017).

Finally, we can simply iterate through the Pareto optimal set generated by the `eaMuPlusLambda` algorithm and print the results to the terminal.
